1. Course Overview
Instructors
● Prof. Kim Diaz (she) - kkhalsa@umich.edu
○ Lecture livestream:
https://umich.zoom.us/j/97410885365?pwd=R05zTksvajJmWTBJZVduNDNiTjlCQT09

● Prof. Emily Graetz (they) - graetzer@umich.edu
○ Lecture livestream:
https://umich.zoom.us/j/91309976442?pwd=RE1Td2V2b0F3NzY0SWMwNDE0UGlXZz09

● Prof. Greg Bodwin (he) - bodwin@umich.edu
○ Lecture livestream:
https://umich.zoom.us/j/95584386714?pwd=DxXZjSdQH6DYho1w6bVauMGn8YtADb.1

See our Canvas page for a complete list of instructors, including Instructional Assistants (IAs) and
Graduate Student Instructors (GSIs) & check out our staff profiles!

1

Course Description
Discrete mathematics is often called the “language of computer science.” It is the backbone upon
which all computational processes are built. In all likelihood, most of the mathematics you have
studied so far concerns functions of real numbers and their derivatives, integrals, roots, etc. But
there are other branches of mathematics that model real-world problems using very different
objects. In discrete mathematics, we focus on operations on 1s and 0s (logic), modular arithmetic
and number theory, set theory, functions and relations on sets, graphs, counting, discrete
probability theory, and how these form the foundational language through which we formulate and
solve real-world problems in computer science.
Required Materials
The official textbook for the course is “Discrete Mathematics” 8th Edition, by Ken Rosen.
Alternatively, if you have access to the 7th edition, you will find most of the same material as in the
8th edition, but page numbers, example numbers, etc. will differ. An online version of the book is
available from the University of Michigan library at the following link. Note that access is limited to
6 concurrent users at a time. There are also two print copies on reserve at the Art, Architecture,
and Engineering Library in the Duderstadt Center.
Textbook: https://search.lib.umich.edu/catalog/record/99187442213006381.

Canvas
We will use Canvas as the main web portal for the course. There is one common Canvas site for all
six lectures and 26 discussion sections. Here we will post lecture slides, lecture recordings, course
calendar, assignments and solutions, grades, and course announcements. The Canvas calendar
includes assignment due dates, exam dates, review session information, and more. Our course
Canvas page will include links to all of the other websites and tools that we use (Piazza, Gradescope,
Google Calendar for Office Hours, etc).

Important Dates
Mark your calendar for the course exam dates, listed below. More information on exams can be
found in the Exams section of this syllabus.

Exam 1 Wednesday, September 18 7:00 - 8:30 pm
Exam 2 Monday, November 4 7:00 - 9:00 pm
Exam 3 Tuesday, December 17 7:00 - 9:00 pm

2

Communication Outside of Class
Office Hours
Office hours are a great way to get to know your instructors better and to ask any and all questions
related to course content, homework, or anything else that might be on your mind. Many students
report that actively engaging in office hours is the thing that benefited their understanding the
most. A Google Calendar listing office hours can be found on both the Canvas homepage and a
Piazza logistics page. This Calendar will always accurately reflect scheduled office hours, as these
times may change during the course of the semester. You may go to any office hours you like and as
many as you like.
Remote office hours will be available. See the office hours calendar for times.

Piazza
We will be using a class interaction tool called Piazza for questions and answers. You can access our
Piazza page through the link on Canvas. You will be able to post questions, answer other people's
questions, give or ask for clarification on answers, and see instructors' comments. You can even ask
questions privately to the staff. When making a Piazza post, please search before asking to see if
your question has already been asked and answered. Do not share answers to homework publicly
on Piazza.

Admin Form
Use the Admin Form for any administrative issues for EECS 203 including personal (health, absence,
VISA accommodations), technical, distance learning, homework, gradescope, or exams. Please
provide as much relevant information as possible. In particular, we will use the information you
provide should you become ill or have to quarantine for an extended period of time in
consideration of final grades. Content-related questions should be addressed through Piazza.

2. Student Support and Well-Being
Inclusion Statement
It is our intention that students from all backgrounds and perspectives will be well served by this
course, and that the diversity that students bring to this class will be viewed as an asset. We
welcome individuals of all ages, backgrounds, beliefs, ethnicities, genders, gender identities, gender
expressions, national origins, religious affiliations, sexual orientations, socioeconomic background,
family education level, ability - and other visible and nonvisible differences. All members of this
class are expected to contribute to a respectful, welcoming, and inclusive environment for every
other member of the class. Your suggestions are encouraged and appreciated.
Lived name/pronoun
We will gladly honor your request to address you by your preferred name or gender pronoun. You
3

are welcome to advise us of this preference at any time during the semester, and we will make
appropriate changes to our records.

Accessibility and Disability Policy
If you have any disability, as defined under the Americans with Disabilities Act, that might affect
your ability to participate in class, or to turn in assignments on time or in the form required, please
contact your instructor and the Office of Students with Disabilities at the start of the term so that
arrangements can be made to accommodate you. The submission process for SSD VISA forms has
changed, and instructors are now supposed to be able to get their students' VISA forms directly
from the University. You will receive a confirmation email from the 203 admin with your
accommodations. Please send an Admin Form ASAP if your accommodations are updated.

Student Well-being
As a student, you may experience a range of issues that can negatively impact your learning, such as
anxiety, depression, interpersonal or sexual violence, difficulty eating or sleeping, loss/grief, and/or
alcohol/drug problems. These mental health concerns or stressful events may lead to diminished
academic performance and affect your ability to participate in day-to-day activities. In order to
support you during such challenging times, the University of Michigan provides a number of
confidential resources to all enrolled students, including:
● Counseling and Psychological Services (CAPS): 734-764-8312; caps.umich.edu/contact
● Sexual Assault Prevention and Awareness Center (SAPAC): 24-Hour Crisis Line: 734-936-3333;
sapac.umich.edu
● Psychiatric Emergency Services: 734-996-4747
● Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD): 734-763-3000; 734-615-4461 [TDD]; 734-996-6661
[VP]; ssdoffice@umich.edu
Another resource available to you as a U-M student is Wolverine Support Network, a student
organization offering free peer-facilitated weekly groups on campus. With 30+ groups per week,
students are placed in a group at a time and location most convenient for them. Trained students
lead groups to promote students’ well-being and build community in an accessible, confidential,
and inclusive environment. To sign up for a group, go to UMICHWSN.ORG/JOIN, or email
wsndirectors@umich.edu with any questions.
3. Course Components
Lectures
There are six lecture sections, four of which meet on Tuesday/Thursday, while the other two do not
have set meeting times. If you are enrolled in a section that doesn’t meet, you are welcome to
attend one of the other sections provided there is space in the lecture hall. We encourage you to
attend the lecture section you are enrolled in, however you are allowed to attend a different lecture
section if you would like. Meeting times and locations for all lectures can be found on the Lecture &
Discussion calendar, linked on Canvas.

4

One of the lecture sections will be marked as “accelerated”. This section will cover the same
material, but slightly faster, and will then use the remaining time (10-30 minutes per week) to talk
about other CS topics. Students attending this section will have the same homework and exams,
and the additional material is not testable nor is it direct practice of the testable content. This
section is taught at the same time as an ordinary section, so you may freely switch between them in
either direction if you feel your lecture section does not fit your learning style. For more
information on this, please see the “Details for Special Sections” document available on our
website.

Discussions
During discussions the course staff will go over concepts introduced in lecture and present
additional examples. You will have the opportunity to ask questions and get clarification regarding
concepts covered in the lectures. Discussions will also help prepare you to complete the Weekly
Check-in (see below).
As with lectures, you are encouraged to attend the discussion section for which you are enrolled,
but you can attend a different discussion if you need/want to, with the exception of the Focus on
Fundamentals discussion sections.
Focus on Fundamentals discussion section attendance is required for those enrolled in those
sections, and attendance is also limited to those enrolled in those sections. A description of the
Focus on Fundamentals sections can be found on the LSA Course Guide. If you are enrolled in a
Focus on Fundamentals discussion section, but cannot attend that time, please enroll in a different
discussion. Similarly, if you are enrolled in a Focus on Fundamentals discussion but do not
anticipate being able to attend the class each week in person, please enroll in a different discussion.
See the Canvas website for meeting times for other discussion sections.
Attendance Policy
We encourage you to attend the lecture section and discussion sections that you signed up for, but
you may attend any section (with the exception of the Focus on Fundamentals discussion sections,
which are open only to those enrolled in those sections).
Attendance is not required in lecture, nor in discussion (with the exception of Focus on
Fundamentals discussions, where regular attendance is required). All lectures and (most, if not all)
discussions will be recorded and available through Canvas a few hours later. While we encourage
you to attend in-person, we understand that you may choose to learn from the recordings instead,
including if you are uncomfortable with the University’s COVID policies and prefer not to attend
class. Consistent with that policy, if you’re sick, we ask that you not attend in-person until you have
recovered from your illness.

Exams
There are three exams in this course which will be given in person on September 18 (from 7-8:30
pm), November 4 (from 7-9 pm), and December 17 (from 7-9 pm). The exams will be held in
5

classrooms on north campus; exact locations will be announced closer to the exam dates. EECS 203
covers a lot of material. Anything that has appeared in lecture, discussion, or homework is fair
game to appear on an exam, with the exception of lecture content labeled "bonus" material.
Practice exams will be posted prior to each exam. In addition, discussions and additional exam
review sessions will be provided during the week prior to the exam. While the material in the
course is inherently cumulative, the three exams are not explicitly cumulative; each question will
primarily test a concept introduced since the last exam.

Exam Conflicts
It is the student’s responsibility to make sure they can attend the scheduled exams. All students,
including students without exam conflicts, must complete the Exam Date Confirmation survey, due
by the add/drop deadline, to confirm their availability for the scheduled exams or provide details
about any conflicts. See Canvas for a link to the survey.
Exam 1 and Exam 2: For the first two exams, there will typically be an alternate exam time offered
for those with a conflict due to another academic requirement or religious holiday, or who are
representing the University of Michigan in an athletic competition, performing arts performance,
etc.
Exam 3: Exam 3 takes place during the Final Exam time slot for EECS 203, which is set by the
Registrar. We have very little flexibility around Final Exam time slots, and thus alternate times for
Exam 3 are rarely granted. Unfortunately, we generally cannot grant alternate exam requests for
weddings, family travel plans, and the like. If you have a conflict with the Final Exam date, please
let us know right away. You must get approval from the Professors before the drop/add deadline
for the semester. This gives you time to either drop the course, or reschedule your conflict, should
your conflict not be approved. Do not assume an alternate Final Exam will be granted!

Homework
Homework (including an individual portion, a group component, and, starting with homework 2, a
grading component) will generally be assigned on Friday and will be due the following Thursday at
10 PM with a two-hour grace period (with no penalty) for late submissions up until 11:59 PM that
same day. Homework solutions will be released early the next day (Friday). Homework assignments
and solutions will be posted on our Canvas page. After the grace period ends, no late homework
will be accepted for any reason.
We cannot accept late homework nor offer homework extensions. We understand that you may be
unable to turn in some homeworks on time due to illness, deaths, or other family emergencies. To
accommodate these normal life events, we allow each student to drop 2 individual homework
scores and 1 Groupwork score. If you need to request an additional individual homework drop,
please submit your request using the Admin Form, and be prepared to include documentation
justifying 3 missed homeworks.

6

Getting your homework done on time: Start early and attend office hours
Many students find it beneficial to start the homework early and work on it in bits and pieces
throughout the week. Cramming at the last minute is discouraged. Even the most seasoned
professors of discrete mathematics will get stumped once in a while on the simplest of problems
and it pays to budget your time so that you can walk away from your homework, get other things
done, and return later when your brain is once again fresh and able to think out of the box. For this
reason, office hours and Piazza will be shut down starting at 8 PM on Thursdays so that you have
the time to write up your solutions clearly and succinctly.
You are encouraged to look over the homework on Friday when it is posted, begin sketching out
solutions for problems that look straightforward, and keep track of the problems that look much
harder. Over the weekend, we ask you to work further through the problems so that office hours on
Mondays/Tuesdays can be devoted to helping you “get started” on those problems that continue to
stump you. On Thursday, we encourage you to submit your solutions even if some of them may be
unfinished; the grading feedback you receive, even on partial solutions, is helpful in refining your
understanding of the material and in preparing for the exams.
Gradescope
Homework is submitted by uploading your work to Gradescope. Please allow sufficient time to
upload your assignment before the 10:00 pm deadline and make sure to match pages to assigned
questions when you submit.
Your work should be submitted as a PDF document. You are encouraged to learn the math
formatting tool LaTeX, which produces PDF files of beautifully formatted mathematics. One
recommended interface for writing LaTeX documents is Overleaf. We will provide LaTeX templates
for each homework assignment to help you use this valuable tool. Handwritten homework, scanned
to PDF, is acceptable, but must be clearly readable. You must ensure that each PDF file is relatively
small (well under the 50MB limit).
When submitting your homework on Gradescope, make sure you match each problem to a page
(or pages). Matching pages ensures that the grader who is grading Problem 5, for example, will be
shown the page(s) on which you solved Problem 5. If you do not match your pages for one or more
problems, we will send you a courtesy email notifying you, and you will have 24 hours from the
assignment due date to match your pages. After that point, the graders may start grading your
assignment, at which point Gradescope will no longer allow you to match pages.
You will get a 0 on all problem(s) for which you fail to match pages. If you do not select pages for a
problem, you cannot submit a regrade request. Your score for that problem will remain a 0. If this
significantly impacts your grade on the assignment, remember that we do drop your lowest 2
homework grades. If you mark the wrong page for a problem (or forget to mark a second page for a
problem), you can submit a regrade request to get points back for these problems (see below for
details on submitting regrade requests), but in this case you will need to go through the full regrade
process, listing the exact rubric items that you feel you deserve for each problem and the page
number the problem is on.

7

Honor Code applies to Homework
You are encouraged to study in groups and work on the homework problems together, but your
individual homework submissions must be written individually. Directly copying homework
solutions is a violation of the honor code.
Weekly Check-ins
In addition to your homework, most weeks will also have a Weekly Check-in, which you will
complete on our course Canvas site. The goal of the weekly check-in is just that: to be a basic
check-in on your understanding of the week's content, and to provide you with immediate
feedback.
Check-ins will be hosted as Canvas quizzes and will consist of a series of multiple-choice questions.
You will have multiple attempts for each Check-in, and you will receive the highest score from any
attempt. The questions on each Check-in will correspond directly to the problems covered in the
week’s discussion, and may also contain review problems from previous weeks. If you attend
discussion and feel fully comfortable with its concepts, the weekly check-in is intended to be
straightforward.
To maximize the value the Check-in provides you, we suggest that you plan to complete the
Check-in shortly after your discussion section each week. To simplify scheduling, Check-ins are due
at the same time as homework, which is generally Thursday 10pm.
To accommodate these normal life events, we allow each student to drop 1 weekly check-in quiz
score. Similar to homework, if you need to request an additional individual drop, please submit
your request using the Admin Form, and be prepared to include documentation justifying 2 missed
check-ins.

ECoach
EECS 203 offers U of M's ECoach, a free, personalized, web‐based coaching tool aimed at helping
you do your best in this course. ECoach gives you strategies about the best ways to study, insider
tips on course resources, feedback on your scores, and evidence‐based tools to boost your scores.
Use of ECoach is totally optional – you can use it as much or as little as you want. At a few points
during the semester, we will offer extra credit for important activities on ECoach. Note that in order
to earn extra credit, you must complete the activity before its due date passes.
● Introduction to ECoach video
● To sign up: https://ecoach.ai.umich.edu/.
● ECoach Feedback and Support: ecoach-support@umich.edu.

Grades
Homework and other assignments are not curved, however we do curve exam scores (the
distribution will be very close to the exam grade distribution from previous semesters). All
assignment grades and [curved] exam scores will be posted on Canvas, and your overall grade is
computed using the weights in the table below. Exam scores will not be curved down.

8

2% of your grade is given for completing various surveys on your experience in EECS 203
throughout the term. While we are hopeful that you will get full credit in this category, if you miss
one or more surveys, your score in this category is still guaranteed to be at least your exam average.
Course component % of course grade
Individual Homework 23
Group Homework 5
Weekly Check-ins
(and attendance for
FoF students)

10
Exam 1 10
Exam 2 25
Exam 3 25
Surveys 2
Total 100

Letter Grade Thresholds
Your overall percentage in the course will determine your final course grade, according to the table
below. We do not round scores to the nearest percentage.
Total (in percentages) Letter Grade
[93, 100] A
[90, 93) A-
[87, 90) B+
[83, 87) B
[80, 83) B-
[77, 80) C+
[73, 77) C
[70, 73) C-
[67, 70) D+
[63, 67) D
[60, 63) D-
[0, 60) E

9

4. Academic Policies
COVID-19 Policies and Procedures
As they have throughout the past two years, policies around academic and public health are subject
to change as this pandemic evolves. This course will follow all policies issued by the University,
which are documented on the Campus Blueprint's FAQ. These policies may change over the course
of the term, so please review the Campus Blueprint's FAQ for the most up to date information.

Regrade Policy & Procedures
[For additional important information, including regrade templates, please refer to the document
Regrade Requests in EECS 203, available on Canvas.]
Homework and Exams are eligible for regrades. Regrade requests are generally open for one week
from the time the graded work is returned.
While we strive to be consistent in grading, inconsistencies and errors do occur and we rely on you
to help correct these mistakes. At the same time, our time, like yours, is limited so we ask that you
follow the steps below to make sure your request is handled appropriately. Failure to follow these
steps may result in a dismissal of your request.
If you think your work may have been misgraded:
1. Read through your answer thoroughly and note which rubric items you did/didn't receive.
2. Read through the posted solution thoroughly and try to map your marked rubric to the
differences between your answer and the posted solution.
After you've read your answer, our solution, and the rubric, if you feel that your answer was
misgraded according to the posted rubric, then you are ready to submit a regrade request. If you
do not understand the rubric, or believe you have an alternate correct solution, please speak to a
staff member in office hours or on piazza.
3. All regrade requests are submitted via Gradescope.
4. Make sure you've done "the three things": read the posted solution, review your submission,
and read the rubric items.
5. To make it as easy as possible for us to give you points back, start your regrade request with "I
have read the posted solution, my answer, and the rubric items."
6. Continue your request by noting which specific rubric items you believe you should/shouldn’t
have gotten and why. If you matched the wrong pages in your original submission, also indicate
which page your solution appears on for that problem.

Collaboration Policy
We encourage you to work with your classmates, discuss the material, form study groups, etc.
However, when completing the individual homework, your submitted assignment must be your own
10

work. Group homeworks are designed for collaboration and you should of course work together as a
group on those problems. Group homeworks should also be submitted as a group: one person from
your group will upload the assignment to Gradescope and tag the other members of your group. If
your groupmate submitted the assignment, make sure you can see it on your Gradescope account to
ensure you were properly tagged.
5. Honor Code
What is the Honor Code?
The Honor Code outlines certain standards of ethical conduct for persons associated with the
College of Engineering at the University of Michigan. The Honor Code applies to all students in EECS
203, regardless of whether they are in CoE, LSA, or another School or College. The policies of the
Honor Code apply to graduate and undergraduate students, faculty members, and administrators.
Read about the UM Honor Code here: (http://www.crlt.umich.edu/faculty/honor). There is also an
Engineering Honor Code: (also found at http://www.crlt.umich.edu/faculty/honor). In this class, as
in many others at the University, you will be expected to sign the Honor Pledge on each exam you
submit. The Honor Pledge is as follows:
I have neither given nor received unauthorized aid on this assignment, nor have I
concealed any violations of the Honor Code. I further agree not to discuss any aspect of
this examination in any way, shape, or form until the solutions have been published.
The Honor code is based on these tenets:
o Engineers must possess personal integrity both as students and as professionals. They must be
honorable people to ensure safety, health, fairness, and the proper use of available resources in
their undertakings.
o Students in the College of Engineering community are honorable and trustworthy persons.
o The students, faculty members, and administrators of the College of Engineering trust each
other to uphold the principles of the Honor Code. They are jointly responsible for precautions
against violations of its policies.
o It is dishonorable for students to receive credit for work that is not the result of their own
efforts.
Among other things, the Honor Code forbids plagiarism. To plagiarize is to use another person's
ideas, writings, etc. as one's own, without crediting the other person. Thus, you must credit specific
information obtained from other sources, including web sites, e-mail or other written
communications, conversations, articles, books, etc.