EECS 465/ROB 422: Introduction to Algorithmic Robotics
Fall 2023 Syllabus
Instructor:
Dmitry Berenson
Office: 2268 FRB
Email: dmitryb [at] umich.edu
Time: Mon, Weds 3:00pm - 4:30pm
Location: 1200 EECS
Course Website: https://berenson.robotics.umich.edu/courses/fall2023iar/index.html
The instructor reserves the right to modify the course outline and policies mentioned in this
syllabus at any time during the term.
Overview: An introduction to the algorithms that form the foundation of robot planning, state
estimation, and control. Topics include optimization, motion planning, representations of
uncertainty, Kalman and particle filters, and point cloud processing. Assignments focus on
programming a robot to perform tasks in simulation.
Prerequisites:
- Required: MATH 215 and EECS 280 and (Junior Standing or Senior Standing or
Graduate Standing) or permission of instructor,
- Recommended: EECS 281 and (MATH 214/217/417/419 or ROB 101)
Course Layout: This course will consist of lectures, reading, and implementing and presenting
a final project employing the ideas covered in the class. Most reading will be from a textbook,
though other handouts may be used. Students will complete quizzes, homeworks, and a final
project report.
Lectures: Students are expected to attend all classes. It is essential that you carefully review
any required reading before each class and be prepared to share your perspective. Class
participation is essential.
Homework: Homework will be assigned throughout the semester. All homework will have
a due date and no late homework will be accepted. Homework must be typed on single-sided,
letter-size paper. All homeworks must be done individually.
Course Schedule: The course schedule is available on the course website.
Grading:
Homeworks 50%
Quizzes (drop lowest) 15%
Final Project 35%
Academic Integrity: All work submitted for credit must be your own. Plagiarism is cheating and
will be dealt with accordingly. Review the college of Engineering’s Honor Code here:
https://bulletin.engin.umich.edu/rules/
Student Disability Services: If you need course adaptations or accommodations because of a
disability, or if you have medical information to share with the instructor, please make an
appointment with your instructor within the first week of classes.
References:
● Steven M. LaValle, Planning Algorithms, Cambridge University Press, 2006.
● Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig, Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (Third
edition), Cambridge University Press, 2004
● Boyd, Stephen, and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge university
press, 2004.