EECS 492: Introduction to Artificial
Intelligence, Winter 2023
Welcome to 492! We’re glad you’re here, and we’re looking forward to a great semester learning
more about AI.
Quick Links
● TBD - The first week of class, we will post links here and on Canvas to the class
calendar, the OH queue, and OH zoom links (for virtual office hours).
Basic Information
Lecture time: Tuesday & Thursday 3-4:30pm
Lecture location: 1571 GGBL
Faculty Instructor: Laura Burdick, BBB 3824, lburdick@umich.edu
● Dr. Burdick typically responds to most e-mails within a day, though usually doesn’t
respond during evenings and weekends.
Faculty Office Hours: Tuesday 1-2pm (conference room, BBB 2733) & Thursday 1-2pm (Dr.
Burdick’s office, BBB 3824)
● Please note that the Tuesday and Thursday office hours are in different locations.
● Office hours begin Tuesday, January 10.
● If these times don’t work for you (or you’d prefer to meet remotely), please send an
e-mail, and we can find another time to meet, either remotely or in-person.
GSIs:
Alex Li, xelail@umich.edu, Tuesday & Thursday 11:30-1:30pm (remote, logistics TBD)
● Office hours begin Tuesday, January 10.
Won Park, wonpark@umich.edu, Tuesday & Wednesday, 9:30-11:30am (remote, logistics TBD)
● Office hours begin Tuesday, January 10.
Discussion times and locations:
Friday 11:30am-12:30pm 2166 DOW Won Park
Friday 12:30pm-1:30pm 107 GFL Alex Li
Friday 1:30pm-2:30pm 1005 DOW Alex Li
Monday 4:30pm-5:30pm 185 EWRE Won Park
Course Description
This course is an introductory course to artificial intelligence. We will cover the following topics:
● Agents. Agents give us a broad framework for understanding all kinds of AI systems,
from robots operating in a disaster zone to social media chatbots. We will look at
different kinds of agents and the environments they operate in.
● Search. Search allows us to plan a path from a starting state to a goal state. Almost any
problem in AI can fit into a search framework! You’ve already seen some search
algorithms (breadth-first search, depth-first search), but we will study more advanced
search algorithms, including algorithms that use external information (informed search)
and algorithms that let you search for a goal state when you have an opponent
(adversarial search, with some game theory).
● Problem Solving. We will look at more complex problem solving frameworks, such as
constraint satisfaction and planning.
● Logic. We will study propositional logic and first-order logic to understand how AI
systems can store knowledge internally and make decisions based on the knowledge
they have.
● Uncertainty. In the real world, uncertainty is everywhere. We will look at how AI systems
handle this uncertainty. We will cover basic probability, and then apply this to AI by
looking at Bayesian networks and MDPs/POMDPs.
● Learning. We want our AI systems to learn from their previous observations and
actions. In this unit, we will introduce algorithms that allow agents to learn. We will focus
on a subset of machine learning algorithms, including llinear regression, decision trees,
neural networks, and reinforcement learning.
Broadly speaking, this course will contain the following components (more details in the rest of
the syllabus):
● Lectures. In-person attendance will be required for 20 of the 27 lectures. Lectures will
be recorded.
● Discussion sections. Attendance will not be required for most discussion sections (with
a few exceptions discussed below). Discussion sections will be recorded.
● Assignments. There will be three kinds of assignments - problem sets, coding
assignments, and ethics assignments.
● Exams. There will be an in-person midterm exam, and an in-person final exam.
Prerequisites
Students must have completed EECS 281 with a grade of C or better; exceptions will not be
granted. CSE graduate students should enroll in EECS 592.
Textbook and Course Materials
The optional textbook for the course is Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (4th Edition),
by Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig (ISBN 9780134610993).
Additional course materials will be posted on Canvas.
Lecture
Lectures in this class are interactive, with time for discussion and in-class exercises. Because of
this, attending lectures in-person is an important part of the learning experience in this class.
Attending lectures will allow you to learn the material better and remember it longer after the
class has ended. This is why you will be required to attend a certain number of lectures
in-person.
There will be 27 lectures over the course of the semester (this doesn’t include the in-class
midterm). In order to earn full credit, you will be required to attend 20 lectures. Attendance will
be taken using a Google form. Each class, you will be given a Google form with several in-class
exercises. We will complete the exercises together in class, and if you attend class, you must
submit the form before 4:45pm on the day of lecture (class will end at 4:20pm, so this gives you
a little buffer time to submit the form). The form will be graded for completion, not for
correctness. If you successfully complete and submit the form before 4:45pm, you will be given
attendance credit for that day. It is considered an Honor Code violation to submit this form
if you don’t attend class in-person.
Because you are only required to attend around 75% of the lectures, please stay home if you
are sick. This also gives you some flexibility for job interviews, travel, etc. Because of this built-in
flexibility, exceptions to the attendance policy will not be granted except in extenuating
circumstances. If you have extenuating circumstances that cause you to miss more than seven
lectures, please contact Dr. Burdick.
Lectures will be recorded. The recordings should be used to review the material (and can be
used if you miss a particular lecture). The recordings will not be posted until after 4:45pm the
day of the lecture.
Discussion Sections
Discussion sections serve several purposes in this course:
● Many weeks, discussion sections will talk about current events in AI, and show how the
material we are learning connects to real-world problems and solutions.
● Many weeks, discussion sections will give you an opportunity to work through exercises
to deepen your understanding of the material. These will be new, interesting exercises
not covered in lecture, so it will be worth your time to attend discussion section!
● Some weeks, discussion sections will review material that you have learned in other
classes that we will use in EECS 492 (e.g., probability). If a topic you have previously
learned is covered in discussion sections, you will be expected to come to lectures
prepared to use that material.
● Some weeks, discussion sections will facilitate discussions about ethical issues in
artificial intelligence (see more under “Assignments”).
For most discussion sections, attendance is not required (the exception to this is the ethics
discussion - please see the next section for more details). However, we think that attending
discussion section is a valuable thing! To help you decide whether you should attend discussion
section each week, we will announce the material that will be covered in discussion section
ahead of time. Because discussion sections are smaller than lecture, they are a great
opportunity to interact with the GSIs. We would encourage you to attend the same section every
week, so that you can get to know your classmates and your instructor.
Discussion sections will be recorded (except for the ethics discussions), though we strongly
encourage you to attend in-person. If you are feeling sick, please watch the recording rather
than coming to discussion section.
Assignments
There will be three different kinds of assignments in this class:
● Problem sets - These will be conceptual and mathematical problems designed to help
you learn the material better. You must work alone for these assignments, though you
may discuss ideas and high-level concepts with classmates.
● Coding assignments - These assignments will involve programming algorithms in
Python. You may optionally work with a partner for these assignments, though you can
work alone if you want.
● Ethics assignments - There will be four ethics assignments throughout the semester.
For each assignment, you will be given an assigned reading. After you do the reading,
you have two options: (1) you can write a paper reflecting on the reading, or (2) you can
attend a discussion section and participate in a discussion about the reading. If you are
unable to attend a discussion section due to illness or other circumstances, you must
complete the paper instead.
Homework must be turned in on the date that it is due, by 11:59PM Ann Arbor time. The
homework must be submitted electronically using Canvas and Gradescope and we will use the
later timestamp to validate turn-in time. Late homework will be penalized 10% per day (where
each day starts at 11:55pm on the due day). Homework turned in after three days will not be
accepted. Certain homework assignments may be associated with a single late day, to facilitate
exam study. This will be noted when the assignment is released.
If you are unable to complete the homework assignment on time due to illness or a personal
emergency, please contact Dr. Burdick.
Note that the only method of submission is Canvas/Gradescope. It is your responsibility to
ensure that the homework has been uploaded successfully by the due date. This may include
checking a box to verify accordance with the honor code policy. Homework that is incorrectly
uploaded will be subject to the associated late penalty. Homework not successfully uploaded by
the due date will not be accepted.
Also note that any changes you make to the homework already submitted on
Canvas/Gradescope counts as a resubmission. If you make any changes to the assignment
after the due date has passed you will be assigned a late penalty based on the number of days
that have passed. For example, if you edit an assignment on February 5 and it was due on
February 2 you will be assigned a 30% penalty (10% per day) as explained above. This is
non-negotiable.
Exams
The midterm will take place on Thursday, February 23 during classtime (please note that this is
the Thursday before spring break). The midterm will take place in-person - there will be no
exceptions to this policy for spring break travel. Please plan your travel accordingly.
The final exam will take place on Tuesday, April 25, from 8-10am. The final will take place
in-person - there will be no exceptions to this policy for travel. Please plan your travel
accordingly.
Office Hours
The instructors will have regularly scheduled office hours each week. You are encouraged to
make use of these to discuss aspects of the course including lecture material and the homework
problems. In cases where you cannot make office hours, contact the course staff to arrange an
appointment; don’t wait until the last minute though!
Piazza
We will be using Piazza to host a course forum and asynchronous Q&A. You are encouraged to
read this regularly and post technical questions. Please search before posting to avoid re-asking
questions that have already been answered.
It is important that you do NOT post your own code or homework solutions to the forum. If you
have a question about any of these things, use a private post (visible only to instructors).
Course staff will answer questions on Piazza throughout the day, but do not expect an
immediate response (particularly on evenings and weekends). We will try to answer questions
within 24 hours when possible. Of course, students are encouraged to answer each others’
questions!
Email Policy
We do not answer technical questions via email. In order to save everyone time, we want all
students to have the benefit of seeing each question and its answer, so please use Piazza
instead.
Grading
Attendance 5%
Problem sets 20%
Coding assignments 20%
Ethics assignments 20%
Midterm 15%
Final 20%
The values are subject to slight adjustments based on the discretion of the instructor. If you
have a problem with the grading on a particular assignment or exam, write a brief (one
paragraph) description of the problem, and e-mail it, along with a copy of the assignment/exam,
to Dr. Burdick for a regrade. Regrade requests must be submitted within one week of when
the graded assignment is made available to the student. Later regrade requests will not be
accepted.
The midterm exam and final exam grades will most likely be curved. Final letter grades will be
calculated according to the following table:
A+ 98 ≤ % ≤ 100
A 93 ≤ % < 98
A- 90 ≤ % < 93
B+ 87 ≤ % < 90
B 83 ≤ % < 87
B- 80 ≤ % < 83
C+ 77 ≤ % < 80
C 73 ≤ % < 77
C- 70 ≤ % < 73
D+ 67 ≤ % < 70
D 63 ≤ % < 67
D- 60 ≤ % < 63
E % < 60
Honor Code
We encourage collaboration in EECS 492, especially on concepts, tools, specifications, and
strategies. In this class, you are expected to follow the College of Engineering Honor Code.
Suspected violations will be referred to the Engineering Honor Council.
In particular, here are some ways that the Honor Code applies to this class:
● Attendance. Attendance will be taken using a Google form submitted each class period.
It is an Honor Code violation to submit this form if you did not attend the class in-person.
It is an Honor Code violation to share the link to this form with a student who is not
attending the class in-person.
● Problem sets. Problem sets must be completed individually. You are free to discuss
high-level ideas with other students, but all solutions must be your own. It is an Honor
Code violation to work out the details of the problems with someone else. It is an Honor
Code violation to compare your solutions, whether in scrap paper form or your final work
product, to other students (and vice versa).
● Coding assignments. You may collaborate with one other student for coding
assignments. It is an Honor Code violation to collaborate with more than one other
student.
● Code publishing. You may not make your code publicly available in any form, for
example in a public GitHub repository or personal website. You are still responsible for
following these rules even after finishing the course.
● Exams. Exams must be completed individually. It is an Honor Code violation to discuss
exams with other students before the exam is completed.
● Previous semesters. It is an Honor Code violation to possess, look at, use, or in
anyway derive advantage from the existence of solutions prepared in prior years,
whether these solutions were former students' work product or copies of solutions that
had been made available by instructors.
If you are at all unsure whether your collaboration is allowed, please contact the course staff via
Piazza, office hours, or email before you do anything. We will help you determine if what you’re
thinking of doing is in the spirit of collaboration for this class.
Wellness
If for any reason you are having difficulty in this course, please come talk to Dr. Burdick;
we want to help. Any member of our community may experience stressors that can impact both
their academic experience and their personal well-being. These may include academic pressure
and challenges associated with relationships, mental health, alcohol or other drugs, finances,
etc.
If you are facing challenges, seeking help is a courageous thing to do for yourself and those
who care about you. If the source of your stressors is academic, please contact Dr. Burdick so
that we can find solutions together.
Accomodations for Students with Disabilities
The University of Michigan recognizes disability as an integral part of diversity and is committed
to creating an inclusive and equitable educational environment for students with disabilities.
Students who are experiencing a disability-related barrier should contact Services for Students
with Disabilities (https://ssd.umich.edu/; 734-763-3000 or ssdoffice@umich.edu). For students
who are connected with SSD, accommodation requests can be made in Accommodate. If you
have any questions or concerns please contact your SSD Coordinator or visit SSD’s Current
Student webpage. SSD considers aspects of the course design, course learning objects and the
individual academic and course barriers experienced by the student. Further conversation with
SSD, instructors, and the student may be warranted to ensure an accessible course experience.
Recordings
Course lectures may be audio/video recorded and made available to other students in this
course. As part of your participation in this course, you may be recorded. If you do not wish to
be recorded, please contact Dr. Burdick the first week of class to discuss alternative
arrangements.
Students may not record or distribute any class activity without written permission from the
instructor, except as necessary as part of approved accommodations for students with
disabilities. Any approved recordings may only be used for the student's own private use.
Course Schedule - subject to change
Date
Lecture (with optional
textbook reading) Discussion Assignments
Week
1 Thursday, Jan. 5
Lecture 1: Class
Introduction, Agents (Ch.
1)
Friday, Jan. 6 /
Monday, Jan. 9
Discussion 1: Get to
know you, review of
depth-first search
and breadth-first
search
Week
2 Tuesday, Jan. 10
Lecture 2: Agents,
Search (Ch. 2)
Wednesday, Jan. 11 No assignments due
Thursday, Jan. 12
Lecture 3: Search (Ch.
3)
Friday, Jan. 13 /
Monday, Jan. 16
No discussion on
either Friday or
Monday - Happy
MLK Day!
Week
3 TBD Python help session
Tuesday, Jan. 17 Lecture 4: Search
Wednesday, Jan. 18 Problem Set 1 due
Thursday, Jan. 19
Lecture 5: Search (Ch.
4)
Friday, Jan. 20 /
Monday, Jan. 23
Discussion 3: Ethics
discussion 1 - not
recorded
Week
4 Tuesday, Jan. 24
Lecture 6: Adversarial
search / game theory
(Ch. 5)
Wednesday, Jan. 25
Coding Assignment 1 due,
Ethics Assignment 1 due
Thursday, Jan. 26
Lecture 7: Adversarial
search / game theory
Friday, Jan. 27 /
Monday, Jan. 30 Discussion 4: TBD
Week
5 Tuesday, Jan. 31
Lecture 8: Adversarial
search / game theory
Wednesday, Feb. 1 Problem Set 2 due
Thursday, Feb. 2
Lecture 9: Constraint
satisfaction (Ch. 6)
Friday, Feb. 3 /
Monday, Feb. 6
Discussion 5:
Review of logic
Week
6 Tuesday, Feb. 7
Lecture 10: Constraint
satisfaction, Planning
(Ch. 11)
Wednesday, Feb. 8 Coding Assignment 2 due
Thursday, Feb. 9 Lecture 11: Logic (Ch. 7)
Friday, Feb. 10 /
Monday, Feb. 13
Discussion 6: Ethics
discussion 2 - not
recorded
Week
7 Tuesday, Feb. 14 Lecture 12: Logic (Ch. 8)
Wednesday, Feb. 15
Problem Set 3 due,
Ethics Assignment 2 due
Thursday, Feb. 16 Lecture 13: Logic (Ch. 9)
Friday, Feb. 17 /
Monday, Feb. 20
Discussion 7:
Review of probability
Week
8 TBD
Midterm review
session
Tuesday, Feb. 21 Lecture 14: Logic Tuesday, Feb. 21
Wednesday, Feb 22 No assignments due
Thursday, Feb. 23 In-person midterm
Friday, Feb. 24 /
Monday, Mar. 6
No discussion on
either Friday, Feb.
24 or Monday, Mar.
6 - Happy Spring
Break!
Week
10 Tuesday, Mar. 7 Lecture 15: Logic
No assignments due
Thursday, Mar. 9
Lecture 16: Probability
(Ch. 12)
Friday, Mar. 10 /
Monday, Mar. 13
Discussion 8: More
probability practice
Week
11 Tuesday, Mar. 14
Lecture 17: Bayesian
networks (Ch. 13)
Wednesday, Mar. 15 Problem Set 4 due
Thursday, Mar. 16
Lecture 18: Bayesian
networks
Friday, Mar. 17 /
Monday, Mar. 20
Discussion 9: Ethics
discussion 3 - not
recorded
Week
12 Tuesday, Mar. 21
Lecture 19: MDPs and
POMDPs (Ch. 17)
Wednesday, Mar. 22
Coding Assignment 3 due,
Ethics Assignment 3 due
Thursday, Mar. 23
Lecture 20: MDPs and
POMDPs, introduction to
learning (Ch. 19)
Friday, Mar. 24 /
Monday, Mar. 27 Discussion 10: TBD
Week
13 Tuesday, Mar. 28
Lecture 21: Introduction
to learning
Wednesday, Mar. 29 Problem Set 5 due
Thursday, Mar. 30
Lecture 22: Machine
learning (Ch. 21)
Friday, Mar. 31 /
Monday, Apr. 3
Discussion 11:
Review of linear
algebra
Week
14 Tuesday, Apr. 4
Lecture 23: Machine
learning
Wednesday, Apr. 5 Coding Assignment 4 due
Thursday, Apr. 6
Lecture 24: Machine
learning (Ch. 22)
Friday, Apr. 7 /
Monday, Apr. 10
Discussion 12:
Ethics discussion 4 -
not recorded
Week
15 Tuesday, Apr. 11
Lecture 25: Machine
learning
Wednesday, Apr. 12
Problem Set 6 due,
Ethics Assignment 4 due
Thursday, Apr. 13
Lecture 26: Machine
learning
Friday, Apr. 14 /
Monday, Apr. 17 Discussion 13: TBD
Week
16 Tuesday, Apr. 18
Lecture 27: Machine
learning
Finals TBD Final review session
Week
Tuesday, Apr. 25,
8-10am In-person final